The KNOT Controlled Vocabularies were developed to answer specific needs of the data model which were not appropriately covered by existing vocabularies, namely the need to classify the types of research project outputs KNOT documents and the need to have an authority control for technologies used in these outputs. This resulted in the creation of the KNOT Taxonomy and KNOT Technology Thesaurus, two SKOS-based controlled vocabularies that are part of the KNOT-DM.

Both vocabularies were developed in an iterative process to refine their hierarchical structures and scope. Due to the central theme of the KNOT project, the [_Introduction to Controlled Vocabularies: Terminology for Art, Architecture, and Other Cultural Works_](https://www.getty.edu/research/publications/electronic_publications/intro_controlled_vocab/index.html) published by the Getty Research Institute was used as a key reference to help define which types of vocabularies to use while the [SKOS standard from the W3C](https://www.w3.org/TR/skos-reference/) was chosen to represent these vocabularies in RDF as it "provides a standard, low-cost migration path for porting existing knowledge organization systems to the Semantic Web". Existing vocabularies specific to the field of Digital Humanities were also used as reference including TaDiRAH, PARTHENOS Vocabularies and the DHA Taxonomy, with the latter two originally considered as solutions to the needs of the KNOT project but found to not be precise or extensive enough.

Taxonomy was chosen as a type of controlled vocabulary to answer the needs for an “orderly classification” of the KNOT project’s domain with a simple hierarchical structure through which to arrange the different types of research project outputs and detail their relationships. The thesaurus meanwhile was chosen to document the technologies used in academic research projects as it is a more complex type of controlled vocabulary that reflects a “semantic network of unique concepts” with a multiplicity of relationships and the necessary controls “recommended for use as authorities in databases relating to art and cultural heritage.”

Both the KNOT Technology Thesaurus and Taxonomy are intended to be “living, growing tools” that will be updated throughout the duration of the KNOT project. During their development a list of editorial guidelines was created (see website), following suggestions laid out in Chapter 7 of the Introduction to Controlled Vocabularies. These rules are the first point of reference for any update to either vocabularies.

The vocabularies are available in both standard SKOS format and with additional DCAT information (files titled with _dcat), similarly to the SKOS vocabularies available from https://schema.gov.it/. 
